I woke up and, still lying in bed, pondered the dream I'd just ha I was
swimming, and since it's winter now it felt especially pleasant imagine summer
swimming. Time to get up! I stretched, lifted myself up a bit... So easy! It
was easy to sit, easy; stand. What was going on? Could I still be dreaming? I
felt especi light, as if I were standing in water up to my neck: my feet bare
touched the floor. But where was the water? I didn't see any. I waved my hands,
an sensed no resistance. Was I still asleep? I rubbed my eyes, but everything
stayed the s Strange! Nonetheless, I had to get dressed. I moved the chairs,
opened the cupboards, got out my cloth' picked up various things, and — nothing
made any sense! 

aye I gotten stronger? Why is everything so weightless? Why pick up objects I
couldn't even budge before? These were not my legs, not my arms, not my body!
wally they were so heavy, and everything took them so much ere had I acquired
such might in my arms and legs? maybe some kind of power was pulling me and
everything else ward, and making my work easier that way? But if so, what a
strong st a little more, it seemed to me, and I'd float up to the ceiling. y
was it I leapt instead of walking? Something was pulling me opposite direction
to gravity; it tensed my muscles, forced me jump. dn't resist the temptation —
I jumped... seemed that I rose up fairly slowly and landed just as slowly. ped
harder and took a look around the room from a fair ice up... Ouch! Hit my head
on the ceiling... The rooms are `hadn't expected to hit it. I'd have to be more
careful. 'shout woke up my roommate, though: I saw him start tossing g, and
after a little while he jumped out of bed. I won't his amazement, just like my
own. I observed the same kind de I had acted out myself, without noticing it, a
few minutes t gave me great pleasure to see my friend's eyes bugging out, y
poses and the unnatural liveliness of his movements. His exclamations, very
like my own, amused me. aited for my friend the physicist to recover from his
surprise, asked Whim to resolve my question: what on earth had happened
strength increased, or did our weight decrease? suggestions were equally
astounding, but there's nothing a n won't start to view with indifference once
he gets used to it. My d I hadn't gotten that far yet, but we already felt a
desire to t the answer. end, who was accustomed to analysis, soon made sense of
the henotnena that had overwhelmed and confused my mind. 

"We can test our muscle strength on the dynamometer, with the spring weights,"
he said, "and find out whether it has increased or not. Here, I'll press my
feet against the wall and pull on the lower hook of the spring. See — five
poods:' my strength hasn't increased. You can do the same, and prove to
yourself that you haven't turned into a fairy-tale hero like Ilya Muromets."
"It's hard to agree," I objected. "The facts contradict you. How is it that I
can lift the edge of this bookcase, which has to weigh at least fifty poods? At
first I thought it must be empty, but I opened it and saw that every book was
still in place... Can you explain, by the way, how it is that I can jump twenty
arshins high!?" "You aren't lifting heavy weights, jumping high and feeling
light because your own strength increased — we've already disproved that
hypothesis with the dynamometer — but because gravity is lower, and you can
prove that to yourself with the same spring weights. We can even find out how
much lower it is..." With these words he lifted the first weight he found, a
twelve-pounder, and hung it on the dynamometer. "Looks" he continued, pointing
at the scale. "A twelve-pound weight turns out to weigh two pounds. That means
gravity has weakened by a factor of six." After thinking for a minute, he
continued, "That's just the gravity on the surface of the Moon, due to its
small volume and the low density of its composition." "So are we on the Moon
now?" I laughed. "If we are on the Moon," the physicist laughed, in the same
joking tone, "that's not a huge misfortune, since we can repeat a miracle like
that, given that it's possible, in the opposite direction — that is, we'll be
able to go back where we came from." "Wait, enough playing games... But what if
we weigh something on an ordinary cross-beam scale! Will we see a reduction in
weight?"

"No, because the weight of the thing will be reduced by the same amount as the
weight you put in the other cup of the scales, since balance is not violated,
regardless of the decrease in gravity." "Yes, I see." Nevertheless I still
tried to snap a stick, hoping to discover an increase in my strength. I didn't
succeed, by the way, though the stick wasn't thick and I had already bent it
yesterday. . "You're so stubborn! Give it up!" said my friend the physicist.
"Instead, think about how the whole world must be disturbed by these
changes..." "You're right," 1 said, throwing down the stick. "I had forgotten
about everything. 1 forgot about the existence of humanity, with which .1 feel
a passionate desire to share my thoughts, just as you do..." "Has anything
happened to our friends? Have there been any other major changes?" 1 opened my
mouth and yanked aside the curtain (they were all • drawn at night to block the
moonlight that kept us from sleeping), to •.exchange a few words with our
neighbor, but I jumped back on the double. Oh horror! el'he sky was blacker
than the blackest ink! Where was the city? Where were all the people? . • It
was some kind of wild, unimaginable, brightly sunlit place! • Could we really
have been taken away to some desert planet? • All that stayed in my thoughts. I
couldn't say anything, I just mooed something incoherently. . My friend was
about to rush over to me, thinking that I must be sick, but I gestured towards
the window. He leaned to look out and so fell silent. • If we didn't fall down
in a faint, it was only thanks to the low gravity, which kept too much blood
from flowing to our hearts. We looked at each other. •The curtains on the
windows were still drawn; the thing that had struck us wasn't visible to our
eyes. The ordinary look of the room and the familiar things in it calmed us
down even more.

We drew together with a certain timidity and lifted only the edge of the little
curtain first, then lifted the whole thing and then, finally, made up our minds
to go out of the house to observe the sky, black as mourning, and our
surroundings. Even though our thoughts were preoccupied by the stroll we were
about to take, we were still noticing certain things. So, as we walked through
the spacious and high-ceilinged rooms, we had to move our large muscles with
extreme care, otherwise our soles would slide uselessly on the floor — without
the risk of falling, however, the way there is on wet snow or on frozen ground.
When we did this our bodies jumped noticeably. When we wanted to put ourselves
into rapid horizontal motion, to start moving we had to lean forward
noticeably, the way a horse leans to pull an overloaded wagon. But it only
seemed that way — in fact all our movements were extremely light... Going
downstairs from one step to the next — how boring! Moving step by step — how
slow! Soon we got rid of all those ceremonious habits, which suited the Earth
but were ridiculous here. We learned to move by leaping; we started going up
and down stairs ten or more at a time, like the most reckless schoolboys; or
sometimes we'd jump the whole length of the staircase or right out the window.
In a word, circumstances forced us to turn into leaping animals like
grasshoppers or frogs. Thus, after running around the house a bit, we jumped
outside and galloped off towards one of the nearest mountains. The Sun was
blinding and looked a bit bluish. Shading our eyes with our hands against the
Sun and the brilliant reflected light from the surroundings, we could see the
stars and planets, also for the most part bluish. None of them were twinkling,
which made them look like silver-headed nails hammered into the black
firmament. Ah, and there was the Moon — in its last quarter! Well, it couldn't
fail to surprise us, since its width seemed three or four times greater than
the diameter of the Moon we had seen before. And it shone brighter than by day
on Earth, when the Moon shows up like a white puff of cloud. Silence... clear
weather... a cloudless sky... There were no plants and no animals.. A desert
with a black sky and a blue, dead 

Sun. No lake, no stream, and not a drop of water! Even the horizon wasn't any
paler — that would have indicated the presence of vapors, but it was just as
dark as the zenith! There was none of the wind that rustles the grass and
tosses the tops of the trees on Earth... There was no chirping of crickets...
No sign of any birds, or colorful butterflies! Just mountains and more
mountains, horrible, high mountains, whose peaks didn't gleam with snow. Not a
flake of snow anywhere! There were the valleys, plains, plateaus... How many
rocks were scattered there... Black and white, large and small, but all sharp,
shining, not rounded, not softened by a wave, since no sea ever rolled here,
ever played with them with a cheerful sound, ever labored over them! But there
was a completely smooth place, though rippled: you couldn't see a single
pebble, only black cracks crawling in all directions, like snakes... Hard
ground — stony... No soft black soil: no sand and no clay. A gloomy picture!
Even the mountains were bare, shamelessly unclothed, since we didn't see the
light veil, the transparent bluish smoke that the air casts over earthly
mountains and distant objects... Severe, strikingly precise landscapes! And the
shadows! Oh, what dark shadows! And what sharp transitions from shade to light!
There were none of the soft tones that we're so used to and that can be
produced only by an atmosphere. Even the Sahara — even that would seem a
paradise in comparison with what we saw here. We missed its scorpions, the
locusts, the hot sand lifted by the dry wind, not to mention the occasional
sparse vegetation and groves of fig trees... We had to think about returning.
The ground was cold and exuded cold, so that our feet were chilling, while the
Sun baked us. Overall, we felt an unpleasant sensation of cold. It was like
when a person comes in from the cold to warm up in front of a blazing fireplace
and can't get warm, because it too cold in the room: his skin feels pleasant
waves of warmth that can't overcome the chill. 

On the way back we warmed ourselves by leaping as lightly as deer over piles of
stones two sazhens high... There was granite, porphyry, syenite, quartz
crystals and various pieces of transparent and opaque quartz and flint, all of
igneous origin. Later, though, we noticed traces of neptunic activity. We were
back in the house! Inside you feel good: the temperature's more even. That put
us in the mood to start trying new experiments and to discuss everything we had
seen and noticed. Clearly, we were on some other planet. This planet had no
air, nor any other kind of atmosphere. If there had been gas, then the stars
would have twinkled; if there had been air, the sky would have been blue and
there would have been a blue veil on the distant mountains. But how was it that
we could breathe and hear each other? We couldn't understand it. A multitude of
phenomena made it clear to us that there was no air or any kind of gas at all:
for example, we couldn't light a cigar and in our haste we spoiled a lot of
matches. We could also compress a sealed rubber bag without the slightest
force, which wouldn't have been the case if there had been any kind of gas
inside it. Scientists have indicated this lack of gasses on the Moon. "Could it
be that we're on the Moon?" "Have you noticed that from here the Sun doesn't
seem any bigger or any smaller than from the Earth? Such a phenomenon can be
observed only from the Earth or from its satellite, since these heavenly bodies
are located almost the same distance from the Sun. From other planets the Sun
must appear either smaller or larger: so, from Jupiter the visible diameter of
the Sun is five times smaller, and from Mars, one and a half times smaller, but
from Venus, on the other hand, one and a half times greater. On Venus the Sun
burns twice as brightly, but on Mars, only half as brightly. And that's just
the difference from the two planets closest to the Earth! On Jupiter, for
example, the Sun gives twenty-five times less heat than on the Earth. We see
nothing

ke that difference here, even though measuring it would be entirely possible
thanks to the store of instruments for measuring carbon and other things."
"Yes, we're on the Moon: everything points to that!" "Even the size of the
clouded moon we saw suggests that — it's obviously the planet we left, not of
our own volition. Too bad we can't examine its spots now and definitively
define our own location. We'll wait for night time..." "How can you say that
Earth and the Moon are at the same distance from the Sun?" I objected to my
friend. "I thought the difference was quite significant! Why, as far as I know,
they are three hundred sixty thousand versts apart!" "I'm saying they're almost
at the same distance, since those three hundred sixty thousand versts comprise
only one four-hundredth of the entire distance to the Sun," objected the
physicist. "A four-hundredth can be disregarded." II How tired I was, and not
so much physically as mentally! I felt irresistibly drawn to sleep... What did
the clock say? We got up at six, now it was five... eleven hours had passed. At
the same time, judging by the shadows, the Sun had hardly moved: there the
shadow from the steep mountain had barely moved towards the house, and even now
it didn't quite reach, while over there the shadow from the weathervane was
still touching the same stone... This was one more proof that we were on the
Moon. In fact, its rotation around its axis is so slow... Here a day should
last around fifteen of our days, or three hundred and sixty hours, and a night
should last just as long. It's not entirely comfortable... The sun would
interfere with your sleep! I remember, I experienced the same thing when I had
to live several weeks in the summer in polar countries: the Sun never set on
the horizon, and it got really tiresome! Here the Sun moves slowly, but in the
same order; there it moves quickly, and every twenty-four hours it makes a
circle low above the horizon...

Here and there you could use one and the same solution: close the shutters. But
was the clock right? Why was there such a disagreement between my wristwatch
and the clock on the wall? My wristwatch said five, but the one on the wall
showed just ten... Which one was right? Why was the wall clock's pendulum
swinging so lazily? Obviously, that clock was slow! My wristwatch couldn't be
wrong, since it didn't have a pendulum swung by weight, but the tension of a
steel spring, which was the same on the Moon as it was on Earth. You could
check that by measuring your pulse. Mine was seventy beats per minute... Now it
was seventy-five. A bit faster, but that could be due to the nervous excitement
from the unusual setting and strong impressions. Anyway, there was still one
more way to check the time: at night we would see the Earth, which turns once
every twenty-four hours. That's the best, the least erroneous clock! Regardless
of the sleepiness that had overcome both of us, my physicist couldn't bear not
to fix the wall clock. I saw him lifting the long pendulum, measuring it
exactly and shortening it to one sixth or thereabouts. The honorable clock
turned into a little tick-tack. But here it wasn't a tick-tack, for the
shortened pendulum behaved gravely, though not so gravely as the long one had.
Thanks to this metamorphosis the wall clock started to agree with my
wristwatch. At last we went to bed and covered up with our light blankets,
which seemed weightless here. We hardly needed to use our pillows and
mattresses. Here, it seemed, you could sleep even on bare boards. I couldn't
get rid of the thought that it was still too early to go to bed. Oh, this Sun!
This time! You were both standing still, like all time on the Moon! My comrade
stopped answering me, and I fell asleep too. A jolly waking... cheerfulness and
a wolf's appetite... Until now our excitement had displaced our usual appetite. 

I was thirsty! I pulled out the cork... But what's this — the water was
boiling! Only slightly, but it was boiling. I touched the decanter with my
hand. I didn't want to burn myself... No, the water was merely warm. It was
unpleasant to drink water like that! "What do you say, my physicist?" "There's
a complete vacuum here, that's why the water's boiling, it's not prevented by
the pressure of Earth's atmosphere. Let it boil a bit more: don't close the
stopper! In a vacuum boiling ends up by freezing....But we won't let it get to
freezing... That's enough! Pour some water in the glass, and put the stopper
in, otherwise a lot will boil away." Liquid poured slowly on the Moon! The
water calmed down in the decanter, but in the glass it continued its lifeless
boiling though the longer it went on, the more weakly. The water left in the
glass turned into ice, but the ice still evaporated and shrank in mass. Flow
would we have lunch now? We could eat the bread and other more or less solid
food freely, though it quickly dried up in a box that wasn't hermetically
sealed: the bread turned into rock, the fruits shrank and also got pretty hard.
On the other hand, their skins still retained some moisture. "Oh, this habit of
eating something hot! How can we manage it? You can't make a fire here: there's
no wood, no coal, even the matches don't burn!" "Can't we use the Sun for this?
You know, they bake eggs in the hot sand of the Sahara!" WC fixed our pots and
pans and other vessels so that their lids closed tightly and firmly. We filled
everything with what was needed, according to the rules of the culinary arts,
and put it all in a pile in the sun. Then we gathered all the mirrors in the
house and set them up so they reflected the Sun's light onto the pots and pans.
Before even an hour had passed, we could dine on foods that were well boiled
and fried.

And what can I say! Have you heard of Mouchot?4 His perfected solar delicacies
were far behind ours! Boasting and bragging? Call it that if you like... You
can blame these self-satisfied words on our ravenous appetites, which would
have made any kind of vile stuff seem delightful. Only one thing was bad: we
had to hurry. I admit it, we stuffed ourselves and choked. You'll understand
this if I say that the soup boiled and got cold not only in the bowls, but even
in our mouths, our throats and digestive tracts; the moment we got distracted —
look, instead of soup there was a lump of ice... Its a wonder our digestive
systems stayed in one piece! The pressure of the steam stretched them out a
great deal... In any case, we were satisfied and fairly calm. We didn't
understand how it was we could live without air, and how it was we ourselves,
our house, garden, and the stores of food and drink in the pantries and cellars
had been transferred from Earth to the Moon. We were even struck by doubt, and
we thought: isn't this a dream, a daydream or a demonic delusion? And along
with all that we got used to our situation and related to it partly with
curiosity, partly with indifference: what we couldn't explain didn't surprise
us, and the danger of dying of hunger, alone and miserable, didn't even enter
our minds. You'll learn the reason for our impossible optimism at the end of
our adventures. We wanted to take a stroll after eating... I didn't dare sleep
a lot: I was afraid of suffering a stroke. I distracted my friend, too. We were
in a spacious yard, with gymnastics equipment in its center, and on its sides a
fence and outbuildings. Why was this rock here? A person could trip and fall on
it. In the yard the ground was ordinary earthly soil, soft. Out with it, over
the fence! Be confident! Don't be frightened by the size! And there we lifted a
stone of sixty poods by our mutual efforts and tossed it over

the fence. We heard it land with a dull thud on the stony ground of the Moon.
The sound reached us not by way of the air, but under the ground: the blow was
carried by the ground's vibration, then by our bodies into the fine bones of
our ears. By this path we could often hear the blows we had struck. "Could that
be the way we hear each other?" "Hardly! The sound couldn't resonate the way it
would in the air." The ease of our movements awakened a most powerful desire to
climb and jump. The sweet time of childhood! I remember how I would get up on
the roof and trees, just like the cats or birds. That was pleasant... And the
competitive leaps across the tape and over ditches! And running for prizes! I
loved that passionately... Shouldn't I remember the old days? I had little
strength, especially in my arms. I jumped and ran fairly well, but I had
trouble climbing a rope or a pole. I used to dream of great physical strength:
I would pay back my enemies and reward my friends! A child and a wild savage
are the same Now those dreams of muscular strength seemed funny to me... All
the same my desires, so ardent in my childhood, had become real here: it was as
if my powers were increased sixfold thanks to the Moon's puny gravity. Besides
that, here I didn't need to overcome the weight of my own body, which increased
the effects of my strength even more. What was a fence for me here? No more
than a threshold or a footstool that I could step over on Earth. And there, as
if to prove this thought, we sailed upward and we flew over the fence without a
running start. Then we jumped up and even leapt over the shed, but for that we
needed a running start. And how pleasant it was to run: you didn't feel your
legs beneath you. Off we went... who could beat the other? At a gallop! Every
time our heels hit the ground we flew a few sazhens, especially horizontally.
Wait! The whole yard, five hundred sazhens, in one minute: the speed of a race
horse... Your "giant steps" don't allow you to make such leaps! 

We made measurements: at a gallop, even a fairly gentle one, we rose about four
arshins above the ground; we moved along the ground five sazhens or more,
depending on the speed of our pace. "Time for some gymnastics!" Hardly tensing
our muscles, and even, for our own amusement, using only our left hands, we
climbed up the rope to the platform. Strange: four sazhens above the ground! It
kept seeming as if we were on the clumsy Earth! Our heads were spinning... With
a sinking heart I was the first to dare to jump down. I'm flying... Ouch! I
hurt my heel a bit! I should have warned my friend about that, but I slyly
encouraged him to jump. I lifted my head and shouted to him, "Jump, it easy
—you won't hurt yourself!" "You're urging me for nothing: I know very well that
jumping from here is the same as a two-arshin jump on the Earth. Of course
you'll feel it a bit in your heels!" My friend flew down too. A slow flight...
especially at first. The whole thing lasted about five seconds. In that much
time you can think of a lot of things. "So what do you think, my physicist?"
"My heart is beating — that's all." "To the garden! To climb the trees, to run
through the alleys!" "Why haven't the leaves dried out there?" Fresh green...
protection from the Sun. Tall lindens and birches! Like squirrels, we leapt and
climbed on the slender branches, and they didn't break. But of course — here we
weren't any heavier than fat turkeys! We glided above the shrubbery and between
the trees, and our movements recalled flight. Oh, it was fun! How easy it was
to keep your balance here! If you tipped on a branch, ready to fall, the pull
downwards was so weak, the tip off balance so slow, that the slightest movement
of an arm or leg was enough to restore it. To the open spaces! The huge yard
and garden seemed like a cage... At first we ran over the flat area. We came
upon shallow trenches, up 

to ten sazhens across. We flew across them at a run, like birds. But the climb
had started; at first it was gradual, then steeper and steeper. What an
incline! I was afraid I'd run out of breath. There was no need to fear: we went
upward freely, with broad and rapid strides up the slope. The mountain was high
— even the easy Moon exhausted us. We sat down. Why was it so soft here? Had
the stones been softened? I picked up a big rock and struck it against another;
sparks scattered. "We're rested. Time to go back..." "How far is the house?"
"Not far now, about two hundred sazhens." "Can you throw a rock that far?" "I
don't know, try!" We each picked up a medium-sized sharp-cornered stone... Who
could throw it farther? My stone went over our residence. And a good thing.
Following its trajectory, I was afraid it would break a window. "And yours?
Yours went even farther!" Shooting here would be interesting: bullets and
cannonballs ought to fly for hundreds of versts horizontally and vertically.
"But would gunpowder work here?" "Explosive materials in a vacuum ought to
express themselves with even greater force than in an atmosphere, since the air
only interferes with their expansion. As far as oxygen is concerned, they don't
need it, because they already contain the necessary amount." fll We came home.
"I'll sprinkle some gunpowder on the windowsill in the light of the Sun," I
said. "Use a magnifying glass to focus light on it... See — fire... an
explosion, even though it's a silent one." The familiar scent, which dissipated
in a moment. "You can fire a shot. Just don't forget to put on a firing cap:
the magnifying glass and the Sun will replace the blow of the hammer." 

The moon sank lower and lower, illuminating us and the lunar landscape more
weakly and then more strongly, depending on which side was turned towards us —
the watery one or the land one, or on how much of its atmosphere was full of
clouds. There came a time when it touched the horizon and began to sink behind
it — that meant we had reached the other hemisphere, invisible from Earth.
About four hours later it disappeared completely, and we saw only the heights
that it still illuminated. But they too went dim. The darkness was remarkable.
A multitude of stars! You can see that many on Earth only with a decent
telescope. Their lifelessness, however, is unpleasant; their motionlessness is
far from the motionlessness of the blue sky of tropical countries. And the
black background was so oppressive! What was that, giving off such a strong
light in the distance? Half an hour later we found that it was the mountain
peaks. More and more such peaks were beginning to glow. We had to run up the
mountain. Half of it was lit up. There was the Sun! But while we ran up, the
peak had already had time to grow dark, and the Sun was no longer visible from
it. Apparently, this was the line of sunset. We set off more quickly. We flew
like arrows from the bow. We could have hurried less than that: all the same we
would see the Sun rising in the west, even if we ran only 5 versts per hour,
that is, if we didn't run at all — what kind of a run is that! — but walked.
But we couldn't help rushing. And there, 0 miracle! The rising star gleamed in
the west. Its size quickly increased... A whole slice of the Sun was visible...
The whole Sun! It rose, grew separate from the horizon... Higher and higher!
However, that was only for us, because we were running; the mountaintops left
behind us were going dark one by one. 

If we hadn't looked at those unmoving shadows, the illusion would have been
complete. "Enough, we're tired!" the physicist cried jokingly to the Sun. "You
can go off and rest." We sat down and waited for the moment when the Sun,
setting in the ordinary way, would disappear before our eyes. "Finita la
(=media!" We turned over and fell soundly asleep. When we woke up we chased
down the Sun again, just for the sake of warmth and light, without rushing, and
we no longer let it out of our sight. It would rise and then sink, but it was
constantly in the sky and warmed us without ceasing. We would fall asleep when
the Sun was fairly high. As we woke up the laggard Sun would be crawling
towards setting, but we would tame it in time and force it to rise again. We
were approaching the pole! Here the Sun was so low and the shadows so enormous
that, as we ran across them, we got properly chilled. In general, the contrast
in temperature was striking. Some elevated places were heated up to the point
where we couldn't even approach. We couldn't run through other places, which
had been lying in the shade for fifteen days or more (earth time), without the
risk of getting rheumatism. Don't forget that here the Sun, even though it was
lying on the horizon, heated the rock surfaces no more weakly, but rather twice
as strongly, as the Sun on Earth when it stands directly overhead. Of course,
this can't be so in Earth's polar countries, because in the first place the
power of the Sun's ays is almost entirely absorbed by the thickness of the
atmosphere. In the second place, they don't shine on you so stubbornly at the
pole: every twenty four hours the Sun and its light go around any rock in a
circle, though they never let it out of sight. You'll say, "But what about heat
conductivity? Shouldn't the heat pass from a rock or mountain into the cold,
stony ground?" I'll reply, "Sometimes it does seep away, when the ground forms
one whole with the main mass, but many granite massifs are simply cast onto the
ground, regardless of their size, and only touch it or some other massif

at three or four points. Through these points the heat passes extremely slowly,
or better — imperceptibly. But the mass keeps heating up more and more; the
rate of radiation of the rays is so slow." We had trouble, though, not with
these heated stones, but with the very chilled valleys that were lying in
shadow. They interfered with our approach to the pole because the closer we
came to it the more extensive and impenetrable the shadowed spaces were. If
only the seasons of the year were more noticeable here — but there were hardly
any seasons: in summer the Sun doesn't rise higher than five degrees at the
pole, while on Earth it rises five times higher. And anyway, how long would we
have to wait for summer, which would, most likely, allow us more or less to
reach the pole? And so, moving along in the same direction after the Sun and
tracing a circle or, more accurately, a spiral on the Moon, we once again moved
farther from the point that's frozen in places with hot rocks scattered over
it. We didn't want to freeze or to burn up either! We moved farther and
farther... It was hotter and hotter... We were forced to move away from the
Sun. We were forced to lag behind it, to keep from being roasted. We ran in the
dark, decorated at first by a few shining peaks of mountain ranges. But then
they were already gone. It was easier to run: we'd already eaten and drunk a
lot. Soon the moon, which we had forced to move in the sky, would appear. There
it was. We greet you, o dear Earth! We were glad to see it, no joke. And how
could we not be! We had been separated from it for so long! Many more hours
passed. Though we'd never seen those places and mountains, they didn't attract
our curiosity and they seemed monotonous. We were tired of everything — all
these wonders! Our hearts were breaking, our hearts were aching. The view that
was so splendid but inaccessible from Earth only exacerbated the pain of 

recollections, the sores of unrecoverable losses. It would have been good at
least to reach our residence as quickly as possible! We couldn't sleep! But
what awaited us there, in the house? Well-known but nanimate objects, able to
prick and lacerate our hearts even more. From where did this longing arise?
Before we had barely felt it. Hadn't it been overshadowed then by our interest
in the surroundings, which hadn't yet had time to bore us by the novelty? Home
as fast as possible, so at least we couldn't see those dead stars and that sky,
black as mourning! Our residence had to be close by. It was here, we'd
established it with astronomical observations, but 'despite indubitable indices
we not only couldn't find the familiar yard — we didn't recognize even a single
familiar view, a single mountain, which ought to have been familiar to us. We
walked along and searched for it. Was it here, or there!? It was nowhere. We
sat down in despair and fell asleep. The cold woke us up. We restored ourselves
with some food; there wasn't much left. We'd have to save ourselves from the
cold by running. As if on purpose, we didn't come across a single suitable
crevice where we could shelter from the cold. Again we ran after the Sun.
Running like slaves, chained to a chariot! Running forever! Oh, far from
forever. We had only enough food left for one meal. What then?  The meal was
eaten, the last meal! Sleep closed our eyes. The cold forced us to huddle
together like brothers embracing. And where were all those crevices that kept
showing up when we didn't need them?

We didn't sleep for long: the cold, still more powerful, woke us. Unceremonious
and merciless! It hadn't let us sleep for even three hours. Hadn't let us get a
good rest. Powerless, weakened by longing, hunger and the advancing cold, we
couldn't run with our previous speed. We were freezing! Sleep started to
overcome me first — and the physicist supported his friend, and then sleep
started in on him — and I supported him against sleep, deadly sleep. The
physicist had taught me to understand the meaning of this terrible, final
drowsiness. We held each other up and gave each other strength. As I recall
now, we didn't even think of abandoning each other and thus postponing the hour
of our own deaths. The physicist was falling asleep and raving about the Earth;
I hugged him, trying to warm his body with my own. I was overcome by tempting
daydreams: about a warm bed, about the fire in a hearth, food and wine... I was
surrounded by my own family... They were taking care of me, feeling sorry for
me... They were taking me...  Daydreams, daydreams! The blue sky, snow on the
neighbors' roofs... A bird flew by... Faces, familiar faces... A doctor... What
was he saying? "Lethargy, extended sleep, a dangerous situation... Significant
weight loss... He's gotten much thinner... But he'll be all right! His
breathing has improved... His responsiveness is returning... The crisis is
passed." Everyone around was happy, despite their tear-stained faces... To make
this brief, I had slept a diseased sleep and now I was awake: I lay down on the
Earth and woke up on the Earth; my body remained here, while my thoughts flew
off to the Moon. Nevertheless I raved for a long time: I asked about the
physicist, spoke about the Moon, was surprised that my friends had come to 

be near me. I confused the earthly with the heavenly: first I imagined myself
on Earth, then I was back on the Moon. The doctor ordered them not to argue
with me and irritate me... "hey were afraid I'd go crazy. Very slowly I
returned to consciousness and even more slowly !::,legained my health. It goes
without saying that the physicist was very surprised when, after I got better,
I told him this whole story. He advised me to write it down and supplement,it
with some explanations. 
